---
layout: post
title: "CNN"
subtitle: 'Basic concepts and codes notes'
author: "Tianming Qiu"
header-style: text
mathjax: true
tags:
  - DL
---

## Structure of convolutional layer with terminology
- In PytTorch, we define [`torch.nn.Conv2d(N, C, H, W )`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/nn.html#conv2d) for one convolutional layer. 
  - **$N$: in_channel**. It is the number of channels of an input image. E.g., an RGB input image has **three** channels. In DQN for Atari games, they have converted raw RGB images into $84 * 84$ gray-scaled frames, but feed last **four:** frames to CNN, so the input channel is **four**.
  - **$C$: out_channel**. It is the number of channels of this convolutional layer output. Actually it depends on how many filters there are. Namely, this number is exactly the number of filters.
  - **$H$: kernel_size**. Here the kernerl refers to convolutional kernerl, so this number refers to size of filters like $H * H$.
  - **$W$: stride**. 
  - **Number of parameters for updating**. We don't know what kind of filters should be used, so the weights in filters are the to-be-learned parameters. Each filter has size of $H * H * N$, with the extra bias parameter, the total parameters are $(H * H * N + 1) * C$

- One description of DQN in Atari games:
	
	>The input to the neural network consists of an 84 x 84 x 4 image produced by the preprocessing map, The first hidden layer convolves 32 filters of 8 x 8 with stride 4 with the input image and applies a rectifier nonlinearity. The second hidden layer convolves 64 filters of 4 x 4 with stride 2, again followed by a rectifier nonlinearity. This is followed by a third convolutional layer that convolves 64 filters of 3 x 3 with stride 1 followed by a rectifier. The final hidden layer is fully-connected and consists of 512 rectifier units. The output layer is a fully-connected linear layer with a single output for each valid action. The number of valid actions varied between 4 and 18 on the games we considered.